OSDOCS-11169: making CSI optional for microshift (#80823)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/microshift-lvms-csi-snapshot-optional.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * microshift_storage/microshift-storage-plugin-overview.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="microshift-lvms-csi-snapshot-optional_{context}"]
= Making LVMS and CSI volume snapshot optional

{microshift-short} had built in LVMS and CSI volume snapshot capabilities which is now made optional. which saves the resources like RAM, CPU, storage needed.

[id="lvms-stop-deployment_{context}"]
== Prevent deployment

LVMS CSI is automatically deployed on the cluster in the `openshift-storage` namespace after {microshift-short} starts. To prevent deploying LVMS CSI driver, CSI volume snapshot or both, use the following steps:

.Procedure

. Specify the following `driver` value under `.storage` node of the {microshift-short} config file:
+
[source,yaml]
----
# ...
  storage
   	driver:**ENUM** <1>
# ...
----

> <1> Accepted values: none, lvms, or unspecified.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<1> Accepted values: "none" or "lvms".
```

Author: done

+
[NOTE]
====
Empty value or null field defaults to deploying LVMS.
====

> . Specify the following `driver` value under `.storage` node of the {microshift-short} config file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Specify the following `optionalCsiComponents` value under `.storage` node of the {microshift-short} config file:
```

Author: done

+
[source,yaml]
----
# ...
  storage
  optionalCsiComponents:**ARRAY** <1>

# ...
----

> <1> Accepted values: csi-snapshot-controlle, csi-snapshot-webhook, or none. None is mutually exclusive with all other values.

Author: done

+
[NOTE]
====
Empty or unspecified array defaults to deploying snapshot-controller and snapshot-webhook.
====

. Once the {microshift-short} config `.storage` node is specified with supported values, you can restart MicroShift by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo systemctl start microshift
----
+
[NOTE]
====
MicroShift does not redeploy the disabled components after restart.
====

[id="lvms-remove-installed-lvms_{context}"]
== Remove already installed LVMS  and CSI volume snapshot

> any pre requisites to be added?

Reviewer: I don't believe so
```suggestion
```

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * microshift_storage/microshift-storage-plugin-overview.adoc

> :_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE

Author: done

[id="microshift-lvms-csi-snapshot-optional_{context}"]

> = Making LVMS and CSI volume snapshot deployment optional

Author: changed to "LVMS CSI provider and CSI snapshot deployments". 
using  "CSI *** implementation", substituting "driver", "snapshot", and "snapshot-webhook" as necessary.

> {microshift-short} now offers optional deployment of the built in logical volume manager storage(LVMS) Container Storage Interface(CSI) provider and CSI volume snapshot capabilities, reducing the use of runtime resources like RAM, CPU and storage.

Author: done
@copejon should I use "CSI volume snapshot controller" in line 7 and 9. we had discussed this to be CSI volume snapshot. Please reconfirm.

> {microshift-short} now offers optional deployment of the built in logical volume manager storage(LVMS) Container Storage Interface(CSI) provider and CSI volume snapshot capabilities, reducing the use of runtime resources like RAM, CPU and storage.

Reviewer: The full name of this CSI sub component is the "CSI snapshot controller." The term is maybe more technical than what's required here. Per my feedback elsewhere, I think we can converge the naming convention on "CSI *** implementation", substituting "driver", "snapshot", and "snapshot-webhook" as necessary.

> {microshift-short} now offers optional deployment of the built in logical volume manager storage(LVMS) Container Storage Interface(CSI) provider and CSI volume snapshot capabilities, reducing the use of runtime resources like RAM, CPU and storage.

Author: maintaining "CSI *** implementation", substituting "driver", "snapshot", and "snapshot-webhook" as necessary" i this section.

> [id="lvms-stop-deployment_{context}"]

Author: done

> == Stopping LVMS and CSI volume snapshot deployment

Reviewer: This sounds good to me

> == Stopping LVMS and CSI volume snapshot deployment

Author: done

> Use the following procedure to prevent the deployment of LVMS CSI driver and CSI volume snapshot controller.

Author: @dfitzmau By default microshift deploys the LVMS and CSI. If a user does not want to deploy these then the mentioned changes has to be made in config file to avoid the default deployment.
@copejon please confirm "if one deployment runs on both capabilities or just one?"

> Use the following procedure to prevent the deployment of LVMS CSI driver and CSI volume snapshot controller.

Reviewer: See my comment on the latest version of this line [here](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/pull/80823/files#r1742361104).

See my [comment](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/pull/80823#discussion_r1742338359) re: "deployment".

> Why would a customer want to stop the deployment?

> Use the following procedure to prevent the deployment of LVMS CSI driver and CSI volume snapshot controller.

Author: the sentence is changed as per latest comments

.Procedure

> . To stop the LVMS CSI deployment, enter the following `driver` value under the `.storage` node in the {microshift-short} config file:

Author: done

+
[source,yaml]
----
# ...
  storage
   driver:'' <1>
# ...
----

> <1> Accepted values are `none` or `lvms`.

Author: done

+
[NOTE]
====
If the `driver` value is empty or null, {microshift-short} defaults to deploying LVMS.
====

> . To stop CSI volume snapshot controller deployment, enter the following `optionalCsiComponents` value under the `.storage` node in the {microshift-short} config file:

Author: done

+
[source,yaml]
----
# ...
  storage
   optionalCsiComponents:'' <1>
# ...
----
<1> Accepted values are `csi-snapshot-controller`, `csi-snapshot-webhook`, or `none`. `none` is mutually exclusive with all other values.
+
[NOTE]
====

> If the `optionalCsiComponents` value is empty or unspecified, {microshift-short} defaults to deploying snapshot-controller and snapshot-webhook.

Author: using null

====

> . To restart {microshift-short} after the `.storage` node is specified with supported values in the {microshift-short} config file, run the following command:

Author: @dfitzmau i have made change to this sentence.

@copejon please confirm if a customer can only set one value?
 I think customers can choose any value from valid set of values but at a time only one value can be given to each field.

> . To restart {microshift-short} after the `.storage` node is specified with supported values in the {microshift-short} config file, run the following command:

Reviewer: @aravipra That's correct. Perhaps instead of `values`, `child nodes` or `subfields` would be more accurate.

> . To restart {microshift-short} after the `.storage` node is specified with supported values in the {microshift-short} config file, run the following command:

Author: done

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo systemctl restart microshift
----
+
[NOTE]
====

> MicroShift does not redeploy the disabled components after restart.

Author: I think "stopped" should be used. I suggest the below:
"Microshift does not redeploy the stopped components after they are stopped and the system restarts." 
@dfitzmau let me know if any this is fine?

> MicroShift does not redeploy the disabled components after restart.

Reviewer 2: Hi @aravipra . Yes, that is fine with me. I'd recommend to stick with "stopped" throughout as "disabled" and "stopped" have different meanings. Typically, "disabled" is preserved to shut a feature off.

> MicroShift does not redeploy the disabled components after restart.

Author: done

====

[id="lvms-remove-installed-lvms_{context}"]

> == Removing installed LVMS and CSI volume snapshot

Reviewer 2: Removing/uninstalling.

I think pick one term and use without. Maybe "Uninstall" is better and "removal" could be reserved for deleting sub-components from the implementations?

Author: done

> To uninstall the deployed LVMS CSI driver and CSI volume snapshot controller, use the following procedure.

Reviewer 2: I'm a bit confused here in that the last instructions I assumed a "deployment" ran on the CSI implementations, but here it reads like CSI implementations are deployments?

Author: @copejon need your suggestion

Reviewer: I agree, "implementation" is more appropriate to the topic whereas "deployment" is already overloaded enough.

In the contributor docs I've been using "deployment" to generally mean "the installed CSI components." I ought to revisit them to make it more clear what we're referring to.

Author: change is done

.Procedure

. To uninstall the LVMS CSI driver, run the following commands:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ oc delete -n openshift-storage daemonset.apps/vm-manager

Reviewer 2: Create separate code blocks for each command.

![Screenshot from 2024-08-30 14-18-51](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ca65bca1-d099-48d9-8a52-49a145ad90d4)

Author: done

$ oc delete -n openshift-storage deployment.apps/lvms-operator
$ oc delete storageclasses.storage.k8s.io/topolvm-provisioner
----
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----

> daemonset.apps "vg-manager" deleted

Reviewer 2: This output might need to be broken up into three blocks based on my code block comment.

Author: done

deployment.apps "lvms-operator" deleted
storageclass.storage.k8s.io "topolvm-provisioner" deleted
----

. To uninstall the CSI volume snapshot controller, run the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc delete -n kube-system deployment.apps/csi-snapshot-controller deployment.apps/csi-snapshot-webhook
----
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
deployment.apps "csi-snapshot-controller" deleted
deployment.apps "csi-snapshot-webhook" deleted
----
+
[IMPORTANT]
====

> Automated un-installation is not supported as this can cause orphaning provisioned volumes. Without the LVMS CSI driver, the cluster has no knowledge of the underlying storage interface and thus cannot perform provisioning/deprovisioning or mount/unmount operations. Workloads with attached volumes must be manually stopped, and those volumes must then be manually deleted by the user.

Reviewer 2: I think this note should go at the start of the section. At this point, the task has been done so informing a customer here might cause some annoyance on their part.

Note: 
![Screenshot from 2024-08-30 14-21-18](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/88ca3e14-eba3-488c-bff7-bc7f3befa025)

Reviewer 2: Workloads with attached volumes must be manually stopped, and those volumes must then be manually deleted by the user.

Maybe this can be removed or added to the procedure lead-in sentence? Might be self-explanatory given the instructions.

The IBM SSG has no issues with "thus" anymore, but I'm not a fan of it as it might be considered "stuffy" language. Perhaps replace with "so it"?

Author: done

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * microshift_storage/microshift-storage-plugin-overview.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="microshift-lvms-csi-snapshot-optional_{context}"]
= Making LVMS and CSI volume snapshot deployment optional

{microshift-short} now offers optional deployment of the built in logical volume manager storage(LVMS) Container Storage Interface(CSI) provider and CSI volume snapshot capabilities, reducing the use of runtime resources like RAM, CPU and storage.

[id="lvms-stop-deployment_{context}"]
== Stopping LVMS and CSI volume snapshot deployment

Use the following procedure to prevent the deployment of LVMS CSI driver and CSI volume snapshot controller.

.Procedure

. To stop the LVMS CSI deployment, enter the following `driver` value under the `.storage` node in the {microshift-short} config file:
+
[source,yaml]
----

> # ...
>   storage
>   driver:`` <1>
> 
> # ...

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# ...
  storage
    driver:`` <1>

# ...
```

Author: done

----
<1> Accepted values are `none` or `lvms`.
+
[NOTE]
====
If the `driver` value is empty or null, {microshift-short} defaults to deploying LVMS.
====

. To stop CSI volume snapshot controller deployment, enter the following `optionalCsiComponents` value under the `.storage` node in the {microshift-short} config file:
+
[source,yaml]
----

> # ...
>   storage
>   optionalCsiComponents:`` <1>
> 
> # ...

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# ...
  storage
    optionalCsiComponents:
    - `` <1>

# ...
```

Author: done

----
<1> Accepted values are `csi-snapshot-controller`, `csi-snapshot-webhook`, or `none`. `none` is mutually exclusive with all other values.
+
[NOTE]
====
If the `optionalCsiComponents` value is empty or unspecified, {microshift-short} defaults to deploying snapshot-controller and snapshot-webhook.
====

. To restart {microshift-short} after the `.storage` node is specified with supported values in the {microshift-short} config file, run the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ sudo systemctl start microshift

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
$ sudo systemctl restart microshift
```

Author: done

----
+
[NOTE]
====

> MicroShift does not re deploy the disabled components after restart.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MicroShift does not redeploy the disabled components after restart.
```

Author: done

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * microshift_storage/microshift-storage-plugin-overview.adoc

> :_mod-docs-content-type: CONCEPT

Reviewer 4: All of this content should be at the end of the assembly, not before the regular use, as this is an edge case, to my knowlege.

Author: checking with @copejon on the position of the the modules in the assembly.

Author: Jon has given lgtm on the PR

[id="microshift-lvms-csi-snapshot-optional_{context}"]

> = LVMS CSI provider and CSI snapshot deployments

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
= Disabling LVMS CSI provider and CSI snapshot deployments
```
And I would add the task here. You could potentially make this its own assembly, too.

Author: made the change, retaining this as concept module for now.

> {microshift-short} can now be configured to disable the built-in logical volume manager storage(LVMS) Container Storage Interface (CSI) provider or the CSI snapshot capabilities. These capabilities can reduce the use of runtime resources such as RAM, CPU, and storage.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{microshift-short} can now be configured to disable the built-in logical volume manager storage (LVMS) Container Storage Interface (CSI) provider or the CSI snapshot capabilities. These capabilities can reduce the use of runtime resources such as RAM, CPU, and storage.
```

Author: done

> {microshift-short} can now be configured to disable the built-in logical volume manager storage (LVMS) Container Storage Interface (CSI) provider or the CSI snapshot capabilities. These capabilities can reduce the use of runtime resources such as RAM, CPU, and storage.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can disable the built-in logical volume manager storage (LVMS) Container Storage Interface (CSI) provider or the CSI snapshot capabilities. These capabilities can reduce the use of runtime resources such as RAM, CPU, and storage.
```
"These capabilities can reduce the use of runtime resources such as RAM, CPU, and storage." Doesn't make sense. Do you mean removing the storage component reduces the use of runtime storage?

Author: disabling the CSI provider or the CSI snapshot capabilities can reduce use of runtime resources.

Sentence can be rewritten as 
You can disable the built-in logical volume manager storage (LVMS) Container Storage Interface (CSI) provider or the CSI snapshot capabilities to reduce the use of runtime resources such as RAM, CPU, and storage.

Reviewer 4: Removing the CSI entirely versus disabling snapshotting are very different. Which is it? @copejon could you clarify?

Reviewer 4: @aravipra Do we have to do both of these things, or just one? What's the use case(s)? Like, we would we do one or the other in production? I think a little "why" information around use cases would be helpful.

Reviewer: MicroShift allows for disabling one or both of the CSI components (driver or snapshotter). Primarily this is to help save cpu/mem runtime overhead. It also gives users the option to install their own CSI driver should they want to, but this is unsupported.

Author: have made a change.

[IMPORTANT]
====

> Automated un-installation is not supported as this can cause orphaning provisioned volumes. Without the LVMS CSI driver, the cluster has no knowledge of the underlying storage interface and so it cannot perform provisioning/deprovisioning or mount/unmount operations.

Reviewer 2: ![Screenshot from 2024-09-04 09-11-52](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b96d73ac-4434-43db-b826-3f41b0f0432f)

Author: done

> Automated uninstallation is not supported as this can cause orphaning provisioned volumes. Without the LVMS CSI driver, the cluster has no knowledge of the underlying storage interface and so it cannot perform provisioning/deprovisioning or mount/unmount operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Automated uninstallation is not supported as this can cause provisioned volumes to become orphaned. Without the LVMS CSI driver, the cluster has no knowledge of the underlying storage interface and so it cannot perform provisioning/deprovisioning or mount/unmount operations.
```

> Automated uninstallation is not supported as this can cause orphaning provisioned volumes. Without the LVMS CSI driver, the cluster has no knowledge of the underlying storage interface and so it cannot perform provisioning/deprovisioning or mount/unmount operations.

Author: include both suggestion
